>>LISA GARR: Hi, and welcome.
I'm Lisa Garr.
The concept of
near-death experiences,
where someone goes
to the flashing light
before their eyes, and they see
their life flash before them,
and then they go down the
tunnel and they see the passed
loved ones-- that whole
classic definition
was brought to us by my guest
today, Dr. Raymond Moody.
Dr. Moody is the
author of a book called
"Life After Life,"
now in its 37th year.
It has sold millions of
copies because people
are really, truly curious
about the phenomenon
of the near-death experience.
So welcome, and thank you so
much for joining me today.
>>RAYMOND MOODY:
Thank you, Lisa.
I just really appreciate
this invitation.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Gosh, absolutely.
37 years ago, you
wrote this book.
What was the inspiration
behind "Life After Life"?
>>MOODY: Basically, in
a word, it was Plato.
I was one of these
kids that-- I just
wasn't exposed to
religion when I was young.
And I'd become an amateur
astronomer at the age of seven
and never had thought
about life after death.
But in 1962, when I was a
first-year undergraduate
student at the
University of Virginia,
I decided to be a
philosophy major,
and reading Plato's "Republic".
And Plato argues
very convincingly
that this question
of life after death
is the most important
question of human existence.
And I was persuaded by that.
>>LISA: He discussed that
hundreds and thousands of years
ago.
>>MOODY: 2,300 years ago.
And at the end of
"The Republic,"
there's this account
of a warrior named
Er, who was believed
dead on the battlefield,
but during the funeral he
actually revived, and sat
up, and described going into
another world where he saw
his life reviewed and
left his body and so on.
And I was very
impressed by that story,
as all philosophy students
are who read that.
And then three
years later in 1965,
I heard that Dr. George
Ritchie who at that time
was a professor of psychiatry
at the University of Virginia,
had had such an experience
when he was a young man.
And I took that opportunity
to find out and listen
to Dr. Ritchie's story.
I was immediately impressed
by Dr. Ritchie, who
remains the finest
person I ever knew.
>>LISA: Well, was he's speaking?
Or how did you find
out about his--
>>MOODY: Dr. Ritchie was very
accessible to the student
groups around UVA,
and he often lectured.
And so just a short time
after I heard about his story,
I heard him tell it
and was very impressed.
And since that time, I've
had the wonderful opportunity
and privilege of talking with
literally thousands of people
from all over the world who've
been to the brink of death
but resuscitated and told
these very similar stories.
>>LISA: Now, have you yourself
had a near-death experience
to be able to write about all
of this, or did you have one
after you started
writing about it all?
>>MOODY: Actually my book
was published in 1975,
and then many years later
I came close to death
by an illness I had called
Hashimoto's disease, which
went undiagnosed.
And in that process I did
come very close to death
and had parts of this.
You know, not the really
classic, full-blown near-death
experience, but elements
of it, I definitely did.
>>LISA: So you came up
with the characteristics
of a classic
near-death experience
through the thousands of
people that you've interviewed
and spoken to and listened
to about their experience?
>>MOODY: Yes, when "Life After
Life" was written in 1974
and published the year
later, at that time
I had interviewed
about a hundred
and-- or knew about
150 cases of this
that I'd been told of by people.
And then of those,
I had interviewed
in depth 50 of them.
And that's how I
came up with the list
of the characteristics,
which incidentally
has held up very well, because--
>>LISA: Oh, phenomally, yes.
>>MOODY: --this has now been
researched by physicians
literally on every
continent except Antarctica.
But this a pattern that holds up
pretty much all over the world.
>>LISA: It's where I connected.
I took a course from you at
the University of Philosophical
Research when I as going
through my Masters.
And I learned about the
near-death experience
through the information
I learned in your course.
Now, I have been through this.
I had a near-death experience.
I had an incredible experience.
And I didn't know
what I went through
until I read it on the internet.
And I thought, this
didn't only happen to me?
This is something
that's-- first, for me,
I had the opportunity of
understanding what I went
through, and that it was
not just exclusive to me,
that there's a community of
people where this is also
an experience, and that
this was something.
And I've battled in
my mind for so long.
Was it psychosomatic?
Was it physiological?
Is this something that the
consciousness goes through,
that tunnel?
I'm sure you've addressed
those issues, but--
>>MOODY: Well, I've
talked with thousands
of people such as yourself.
And as a general
rule, what they tell
me is that it was even more
real than ordinary waking
experience.
>>LISA: True.
>>MOODY: They say it's not--
>>LISA: Yes, hyperconsciousness.
>>MOODY: --dreamlike in any way.
It's more real than real
is what I've often heard.
>>LISA: It's true.
It's absolutely true.
I was in an accident,
and I had that experience
of lifting up over the scene.
And I was able to see and hear
the thoughts and the feelings
of all of the medics below
me-- this person, where they're
off purpose, and
this one who had
a problem with relationships.
I was able to hear
their mind chatter.
And at that same time, I was
completely consciously aware
of everything that was going on
in my body, but I wasn't there.
And I'm sure you've heard
this thousands of times.
We actually have
a clip of a movie
that you were in--
it's a great movie.
And it was called "Through
the Tunnel and Beyond."
And so I want to show this clip
so that people can kind of get
an idea of what it is
that we're talking about.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>DIANNE ARCANGEL:
In helping people
walk through the grief
process and knowing
that there is life after
death is tremendously
healing for them.
Actually, in my work, I've never
worked with a dying patient who
did not have an
apparitional experience.
It's 100%.
You can write this in stone.
If a person is terminally ill,
one that's close to death,
they're going to have an
apparitional experience.
In fact, one thing that
we're doing in hospice,
if a person has had an
apparitional experience
or if they've had a
reunion, that person becomes
top priority,
because we know death
is imminent, that it's always
within one week or two weeks
that a person is going to die.
No matter.
If we think maybe
they've got six months,
we're not real sure if hospice
even ought to take them in,
but once a person has that
apparitional experience,
if they have a
terminal illness, we
know that person is greeting
them, they're loving them,
and they're escalating
them to the other side.
And then people in
bereavement groups,
there's a high number
who also have a reunion.
I was very familiar with this.
It was like a common,
everyday occurrence.
And hearing Dr. Moody
speak for the first time,
I was on the edge of my seat.
I said, how could he do this
under controlled circumstances?
It was just incredible to me the
thought that he could do that.
62 people have been through
the oracle in Houston.
Out of the 62, 48 have had some
type of reunion experience.
And actually I call mine oracle,
because oracle means a place
for acquiring wisdom.
And I have found that even
when a person comes and has
a session, even if they do not
have a reunion, something very
profound, a deep psychological--
a deep psychic change
takes place for them.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: It's so
healing for people
to go through things like that.
And we're going to talk in a
minute about those controlled
experiences and how
someone who maybe hasn't
had a near-death experience
can recreate it, in a sense.
But let's talk a little
about the characteristics
that you so
wonderfully describe.
What is the first experience
that someone typically
will tell you when they have
this near-death experience?
>>MOODY: Again,
generally what people
tell us is that when they're
at the brink of death
and their heart stops beating,
for example, that they will
actually hear the doctor
say something like,
oh my god, he's dead,
or whatever, which
comes as a surprise to
them, because what people
tell me is that--
people say things like,
I have never felt
so alive as when
I heard that doctor
say I was dead.
But from their
point of view, they
seem to leave their bodies.
They watch the scene of the
resuscitation from above.
They can talk about
the conversations that
went on among the
caretakers and so on,
as you said, not
hearing an audible voice
but rather becoming aware of
the thoughts of the doctors
and nurses and so on.
>>LISA: Now, as a
psychiatrist though,
is that a normal physiological
response to being unconscious?
>>MOODY: Well, no.
I think that
out-of-body experiences
are-- it's a vast
subject, but no.
This is something outside of
the realm of psychopathology.
This is not anything to
do with mental illness.
But it's an entirely
different category
of altered consciousness.
>>LISA: OK, I thought
you as a scientist would
know the differences,
and I've always
been curious about that myself.
OK, so someone has this
experience of rising above.
You hear this time
after time after time.
And then what is
the next experience
that classically follows that?
>>MOODY: Again, what we hear
from people universally,
however articulate or well
educated or multilingual they
may be, they tell
us that they simply
have no words to describe
what happens next.
They say this is beyond our
ability to put it into words.
But in trying to do
this, what they say
is that they become aware
of a passageway or a tunnel.
And they go through this
tunnel, and they come out
on the other side into
this incredibly brilliant
and warm and comforting
and loving light.
They seem to be just
taken up in this light.
And in that light, they say that
relatives or friends of theirs
who have already died
seem to be there almost
in the role of a
greeting committee
to help them through
this transition.
And they tell us
about panoramic memory
in which every
detail of their life
is displayed around
them in this sort
of full-color,
holographic, 3D panorama.
>>LISA: Like a life review?
>>MOODY: Yes.
And they say that when you--
in this situation, when
you see each action
of your life,
it's like you're watching
another person when you see
yourself do that, and that when
the action has its consequence,
then you are embedded in the
consciousness of the person
with whom you've interacted.
So if you see yourself doing
something mean to somebody,
then you feel the hurt.
But if you see yourself
doing something kind hearted,
then you feel the good
feelings you brought about.
>>LISA: Right.
I felt complete expansiveness
of consciousness,
like the walls that
we're in, called
our body, are
basically limiting,
and what is beyond that is
limitless, is expansive.
And I somehow found myself with
Asia, that Asia came to me.
And that was the limitness.
That was the-- yeah.
Look, I'm trying to put it
into words, and I can't.
Yeah.
It was incredible,
expansive consciousness.
>>MOODY: Yes.
People say sometimes that
they leave their body
and they go to vast distances
away from the hospital.
>>LISA: Yeah.
We have another clip
from this movie kind
of explaining or showing this
in a little bit more detail.
Let's take a look at that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>MOODY: Pretty much
all over the world,
we've found this common pattern.
They tell us that at this
point where their doctor says
they are dead, that
they may actually
hear the physician
say, oh my, he's dead,
or we've lost her, or
something like that.
And they say that from
their perspective, actually,
they still feel very much alive.
Indeed, their consciousness
is heightened.
And they tell us that they seem
to leave their physical bodies.
They say that they
float up, typically
right above the bed in the
operating room or the emergency
room.
And they look down, and they can
see their own physical bodies
lying on the bed down below.
>>I was above my body.
I was floating.
And there were people
around me, except I
didn't realize that that
person there was me.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: It's fascinating
to see that there are so
many different people
with the same account.
>>MOODY: Oh, yes,
all over the world.
>>LISA: All over the world.
And they just attracted
to you once they
saw this information come out.
Now, does this have any
type of religious reaction
that you've experienced
in the past?
>>MOODY: Well, in
terms of people
who have these experiences,
some were religious
and some were not.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MOODY: So it doesn't--
whether or not a person has such
an experience doesn't seem
to have anything to do with
whether they were religious.
>>LISA: So does it
depend on their belief
system ahead of time?
>>MOODY: I don't think so.
To a certain extent, the
words that they bring to it
have to-- are drawn the
best-- from their traditions,
but this comes with the
proviso that they tell us
that the words really
aren't adequate.
But one thing we
find is that even
the people who had no prior
religious understanding
or belief prior to
this experience,
afterward they come back
and say, wow, it's real.
There is a God.
There is life after
death, and so on.
And yet what it tends to do is
to, as a general rule, again,
to make them nondenominational.
What people-- I hear
from people all the time
is they say, well,
you know, what
I learned was that it
seems to me that all
of the great religions are
looking at part of this,
but that even then that it's
something that transcends even
what the religious
traditions tell us
because it is indescribable.
People say that it's
beyond their ability
to put it into words.
>>LISA: When you
had your experience,
did you see that light?
Did you go through the
same euphoric experience?
>>MOODY: Well, one thing
I should so say probably
is that not everybody has
this whole full-blown picture.
>>LISA: I'm glad you said that.
Yeah.
>>MOODY: And what it tends to
be is that if somebody has only
a momentary cardiac
arrest, for example,
they're more likely to just tell
us one or two of these things,
like I got out of my body, I
saw the resuscitation going on,
and then I came back to my body.
But if the cardiac
arrest, say, ling--
goes on for several
minutes, then they're
more likely to tell you more
of the story, like I got out
of my body and went through
this tunnel into the light,
and so on.
And in those cases
where the cardiac arrest
go on for extreme
lengths of time,
people will tell you this
whole full-blown picture
of going into this light,
and seeing their life
review, and other
things, as well.
So it seems to be partly
dependent on how close they
got to death.
The closer you get to
death, the more involved
and detailed and complex
this experience gets.
>>LISA: How does
this help people
who have people that
they know that have
been through this experience?
How does it help
people deal with death?
>>MOODY: Well, first of
all, people that come back
from this experience say
they are not afraid of death,
and that-- because what they
learned from this experience,
it convinces them totally that
what we call death is just
a transition into another
dimension of existence.
>>LISA: And that it's
a very nice existence.
Have you heard
that consistently?
>>MOODY: Oh, yes, yes, yes.
>>LISA: It's very,
very peaceful.
>>MOODY: Yes, yes.
And so they say that-- and
completely wrapped up in love
is what you hear from people.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Unconditional.
>>MOODY: Yes.
And yet at the
same time, they say
that it's not that they
want to die anytime soon,
that they realize that life
is a learning experience,
and that certainly it's a
bad move to take yourself out
of it prematurely, but that
life has a purpose, too.
And yet at the same
time, Lisa, there
is this universal thing I
hear so often from people
that there's always
a kind of nostalgia.
Dr. George Ritchie,
the first person
I-- living person I
ever heard this from,
used to say that sometimes
he just got homesick
for that beautiful
place he had been,
and that many times in
working with patients,
for example, he felt
this presence of love
that he had
encountered and so on.
So there's that homesickness,
too, and yet this willingness
and commitment to go on in life
and to get things done here,
as well.
>>LISA: Yes.
I absolutely experienced that.
That's when I started my
radio show and everything.
But when people
come to you and they
explain their circumstances,
their experiences with this,
do you counsel them?
What do you say to
them, and how do you
give them guidance
to continue on?
>>MOODY: Well, when
I first started
doing this back in
the '60s, people
who had this experience
very often suspected
they might be alone.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>MOODY: And many people
didn't want to talk about it.
>>LISA: No.
Uh-uh.
>>MOODY: And so it was
a great relief to them
to be able to talk
with somebody who
was accepting and understood
and had heard this before.
And I think it does help people
to talk about their experience.
>>LISA: It does.
>>MOODY: But far more,
I think, is the impact
that the experience has
on these two things.
Number one, that it
eliminates the fear of death.
And secondly, that whatever
they had been chasing before--
and it's my experience,
both as a human being
and as a psychiatrist,
is that everybody
seems to be chasing something.
Like, I've spent my
life chasing knowledge.
Some people chase
fame or power or money
or any of these other things.
>>LISA: It's a pursuit,
constant pursuit.
>>MOODY: But whatever
they were chasing,
they said when they come back
from this that it's-- what they
realized that what this is
all about is to learn to love.
And that even when
they-- Because
if you think about this review,
then it becomes obvious.
Because they see
in this life review
that if they've been
unkind to people, then
at the end of their life, that
they empathically experience
the hurt that they brought
about in other people's lives.
And if they've done
nice things, then they
feel the good feelings.
>>LISA:I got to tell you
that I-- I-- I just--
that is exactly
what happened to me.
And I'm taking this moment
as just a-- I was broken up
with my boyfriend
at the time, and he
was the one who was
the first person
at the scene of the accident.
It was a bike accident.
And it was that moment-- it
was after that that I realized
he was the man I was
supposed to marry.
And I did.
And I married him, and
I'm still married to him.
But that is true.
It was-- the
relationship was-- it
was-- I was not good
in the relationship.
And I got that completely.
It wasn't intentional that I got
that, that I woke up and went,
oh, I was da--
Thank you for saying that,
because that is absolutely
what happened to me.
Yeah, I got a full wake-up
call about-- and this
was-- this is the
man I'm supposed
to be with the rest of my life.
And I had-- it wasn't
only that experience that
made me realize that,
but now that you're
saying this, that is
exactly what happened.
He helped me back to health.
He was the one who took
me to the hospital,
because I couldn't
remember anything, my name.
I couldn't speak.
And he spoke for me.
And it was beautiful.
>>MOODY: Oh, how wonderful.
If you think about this
life review for a moment,
this is a startling thing.
Let's-- For the moment, let's
set aside all talk about life
after death, and let's just ask
what we can draw as a minimal
inference.
Let's say we don't-- we want
to draw the smallest inference
that we can.
We want to-- For the
moment, we'll just set aside
thinking about life after death,
and we'll think about this one
thing that people,
in their life review,
see what they have done
to others and the feelings
they brought about.
Now, just from that
one fact, we can draw,
I think quite confidently,
an amazing conclusion,
which is that life is
a two-phase process.
Like at first, we
lead it forward,
as the actor or protagonist.
And then, at the end of
death-- at the end of life,
it's like we switch around
and we watch the same action
from the perspective of
the other characters.
Now that, to me, is startling.
>>LISA: Give me an
example of that.
I see what you're saying, but--
>>MOODY: Well, for example, if I
do something unkind to someone,
then when I die I'm
going to be that person.
When I review that
action, I won't see it
through these eyes.
I will see it through
the heart of the person
with whom I've interacted.
And what this really
does for you, I think,
is it makes you
much more cautious.
I've tried for many
years to always keep
that in my mind, that
whatever I'm doing or saying
that someday I'm going
to have to look at this
from the other
person's perspective.
Now, I will also
be quite honest.
It works, but it works slowly.
It takes practice.
And you still find yourself
flying off the handle or saying
things you wish you hadn't.
But I think when I look back on
my life for the last 40 years,
I'm doing it a greater
and greater percentage
of the time at least.
But even people who've been
through this experience
and who've, years ago, will
say that-- as Dr. George
Ritchie said to me one time-- he
said, Raymond, this experience
makes your humanity even
more of a burden in a way.
And George was just a very
extremely kind-hearted
individual.
And he wouldn't have
put it in the words
that I'm going to
put it in, but I've
heard that same
sentiment expressed
from so many other people.
I know exactly what he meant,
and that is, let's face it.
It's very difficult to get
through the average day
without wanting to choke
at least one person.
That's the reality of life.
And what people say is in
this review of their life,
they see that what this
is all about is love,
but that it's still very
difficult on the daily--
day-to-day routine, that
you find yourself flying off
the handle, but
that gradually, I
think by making
this a practice, you
do get more conscious of it.
>>LISA: I will
assert that you don't
need to even necessarily
have a near-death experience
to get that lesson.
>>MOODY: Well, that's
true, but definitely
a near-death
experience helps that.
>>LISA: It definitely
emphasizes it, yes.
But I would suggest
that's a wonderful way
to look at living
life is to understand
that in the overall life review,
it is about consciousness,
it is about love, and it is
about ultimately taking care
of other people.
I mean, that's--
>>MOODY: It is.
>>LISA: Just the-- being
aware of the feelings
of other people.
Being aware of the feelings
of other people, really.
>>MOODY: Yes.
>>LISA: OK, let's get-- so
shared death experiences.
What are shared
death experiences?
>>MOODY: Well, a very
interesting fact is that all
of the phenomena
that we identify
as the near-death experience,
including leaving the body,
going toward this
light, seeing the light,
seeing the apparitions
of the deceased
and so on, and even the
panoramic life review,
occur frequently
not just to people
who almost die and return
but to the bystanders
at the bedside of the dying.
That it's a very
frequent phenomenon
that, as someone dies, that
the bystanders themselves
will have these elements
that we identify
as the near-death experience.
For example, they may
say that, as mother died,
I myself felt that
I left my body
and accompanied her
partway toward this light.
Or you hear a lot of people,
including-- I hear this a lot
from doctors, that
as the patient died,
they saw what seemed to be
a light leave from typically
the upper part of
the body and rise up,
or in some cases a transparent
replica of the person stand up
and move away from the body.
And hearing music at the bedside
of the dying is very common,
or how the light
permeates everything.
And the bystanders
may say that they
see the spirits of
the deceased relatives
and loved ones of the person
who's dying come into the room
as to escort them away.
And most incredibly,
and I have many cases
of interviewed over the
years of people who tell me
that, as their loved one died,
they empathically co-lived
the life review of the
person who passed away.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>MOODY: Now, what the
shared death experiences mean
in terms of the typical
way that this is debated
is that-- well, I'm
sure that everybody's
heard that when the
discussion turns
to near-death experiences,
some people take it seriously.
Other people say,
well, this is just
the cutoff of the oxygen
flow to the brain,
creates this
hallucinatory phenomenon
that gets reported as the
near-death experience.
But that fails to account for
why the bystanders would have
the same experience, because
the oxygen flow to their brain
is not compromised and yet
they have the same experience.
>>LISA: And you've heard this
over and over and over again?
>>MOODY: Yeah.
Initially from one of my own
medical professors back in 1972
who had such an
experience when she
was trying to resuscitate her
own mother who passed away.
And when her mother did
pass away, the physician
herself left her body and
went partway toward this light
with her mother who was dying.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
Your experiences
have been incredible.
So this took you on a
journey to various locations
around our world.
We have a clip of a place.
Tell us a little bit about
what we're going to see here.
>>MOODY: Oh, yes.
Well, incredible as it may
seem, the factual reality,
which you can learn
from standard textbooks
of ancient Greek
philosophy, for example,
is that the ancient
Greek philosophers,
who are the foundation stones
of all Western civilization--
that's where it began.
But these individuals, many
of them during their lifetimes
were thought to
have been related
to this technique of calling
up the spirits of the deceased.
And the ancient Greeks
had institutions
where they-- which they
called Oracles of the Dead,
where they practiced various
procedures to be able to bring
people into a state of
consciousness during which they
would have visionary reunions
with their departed loved ones.
Well, I was interested
in this in college,
but back in the 1980s I read
the archaeological reports
where one of these sites
had been uncovered.
And based on what the
archaeologists found,
I was able to figure
out how they did it.
And so I set it
up, and it works.
And now I-- It works.
And then you might
say, well, sure,
it works for Raymond Moody.
No, it works for anybody
who wants to set it up.
And numerous other psychologists
and so on around the world
have set up this procedure and
apparatus that I figured out.
And it really does work.
You can take people through
a procedure during which,
in a full state of
waking awareness,
they seem to see and
converse with the spirits
of their departed loved ones.
>>LISA: It's more of a
journey that they go through,
and it's based on
what you found.
I want to show people the
clip of where you were.
This is basically
the place in Greece,
which is the origin of
the Oracle of the Dead.
Let's take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>MOODY (VOICEOVER): Dr.
Dakaris in his search
for this site surmised that,
in fact, the Oracle was
in the northwest corner
of Greece in Epirus.
Homer talks about the Oracle
being located at a point
where two rivers flow together
to form the Acheron River
and that there was
a pinnacle of rock.
All Dr. Dakaris did was to trust
Homer and to go to the location
that he believed Homer
was talking about,
excavate it, and indeed did find
this subterranean complex there
exactly at the location where he
surmised Homer had located it.
The institution
was subterranean.
This was another factor in why
it was so long undiscovered.
Even in its heyday in antiquity,
it was entirely underground.
In approximately
160 BC, the Romans
burned the Oracle of the Dead.
And at this point, this dropped
out of Western civilization
as we know it.
Then subsequently in about
350 AD, the church banned it.
They made it anathema
for a Christian
to believe that a spirit
can be seen in the mirror.
And so for that reason, we have
had no continuing tradition
of evocation of the deceased
in Western civilization.
>>LISA: So you went to this
location with the idea in mind
to be able to
replicate this concept
of the Oracle of the Dead?
And so you explored it.
>>MOODY: Yes, and you don't
really need much equipment.
This worked by
creating what we called
an optical clear depth, where
you can take a polished silver
bowl, for example, fill it
with water and olive oil.
And you gaze into it, and
that gives you a depth.
You don't see any
reflections, but just
like you're gazing
away into eternity.
And under that
circumstance, many people
will have what we call eidetic
imagery, which is full-color,
moving, three-dimensional,
brightly colored visions
of which you don't seem to have
any conscious control over.
They unfold of their own accord.
And so I just set this up
in my research facility
and just took a big wall
mirror and surrounded it
in a darkened area
with black cloth
so that you exclude reflections,
got a comfortable easy chair
in front of it, and you take
people through a procedure.
You ask them to choose
some one person who's
died that they
want to see again.
And then just as I would
as a grief counselor,
I get them to talk
about the person,
to bring up all their
memories and to talk
about the good points
of the relationship,
the sticking points
of the relationship.
This lasts an hour or two.
Then you let them sit
in this little chamber
and leave them in there
for about an hour,
and tell them just
to get relaxed
and to gaze into the mirror.
And under those circumstances,
many people actually
do see full-color, very
lifelike apparitions
of their departed loved ones.
About 30% of them tell
us that they absolutely
hear the audible
voice of the deceased.
Almost all the rest
of them talk about
a mind-to-mind or heart-to-heart
communication, a vivid sense
of the presence of the deceased.
>>LISA: Is this a healing
experience for people?
>>MOODY: Oh, yeah.
Yeah, this does
seem to really help
people move on in their grief.
Because one thing
I hear from people
all the time is that, if I
only had five more minutes.
And this is what
we're able to provide.
This does work.
And this is not Raymond
Moody talking, but--
>>LISA: You've done this
under scientific studies.
>>MOODY: Well, I've done
it under very controlled
circumstances.
And this is now taught at
a institute in California,
a psychotherapy
training institute.
It's incorporated into
the curriculum there.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Yeah, We're going to show
some pictures of that.
But it was all based
on your experiences
of where you went to the
Oracle of the Dead to see.
So let's take a look at that,
because it shows the ruins.
And this is what they did in the
ancient Greek culture, right?
>>MOODY: Oh, yes, this
was part and parcel
of the ancient Greek
culture, and many
of the great classical
writers of antiquity
talk about this place.
So it was a standard
institution in ancient Greece.
>>LISA: So you had to go.
Let's take a look at it.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>MOODY (VOICEOVER):
We're here at one
of the most amazing places in
the world-- to me, at least.
This is the Oracle
of the Dead at Ephyra
where, in ancient
times, people would
come to actually see and
visit with the spirits
of their departed loved ones.
Until recent times,
scholars have
assumed that what
was going on here
was simple fraud, in the sense
that we in the 20th century
West presumably know that such
things that were described here
by the ancient writers can't be.
But in light of
recent developments
and research that's
been done now
by many psychologists
replicating
the experience of seeing
apparitions of the departed,
we can now have a
plausible explanation
for what was going on in this
rather amazing sanctuary.
And now we come through this
entranceway of enormous stones
into a courtyard,
which is laid out
to give the impression
that one is in a cave
or in an underground world.
One has to imagine that in
antiquity this was roofed over
so that we literally
felt as though we
were in the underworld.
At this point,
the pilgrims would
have been met by the
psychagogues, the guides who
lived here to
conduct the pilgrims
though the experience of
visiting with their deceased.
As we go in a little bit
into the more functioning
part of the Oracle proper, we
find immediately in front of us
here a wall.
The right part of the wall
was a medieval addition.
The Byzantine church built a
chapel here in medieval times
on the ruins of
the ancient Oracle.
>>LISA: So they did
this 2,300 years ago.
It shows that people have
been so curious about life
beyond life, or this passing
experience, for so long.
What exactly did
they use that for?
What was that for?
>>MOODY: Basically, when
you read the accounts that
have survived from
antiquity of people
who visited this
Oracle of the Dead,
you can pretty much
tell that basically
what it was was grief.
This was a way that
they had if they
had some issue with the
person who had passed away
that they couldn't get beyond.
They would go to these places
and go through this procedure,
during which they could
actually see and converse
with the person and clear it up.
And that's the
same reason people
have come to me at my place.
>>LISA: For thousands
of years, people
have been trying
to heal from grief.
And it is very,
very challenging.
>>MOODY: Yeah, yeah.
The Oracle of the Dead-- one of
the Greek Oracles of the Dead
has been there at
least since 1075 BC.
So that was 3,000 years ago.
And so this was
probably-- it's really
not just an ancient
Greece-- Greek thing,
this was-- Pretty much all over
the world people had discovered
this, even in prehistoric times.
>>LISA: As a psychiatrist,
do you really
think that there is such a
thing as getting over grief?
>>MOODY: No, but even
more so as a human being,
I don't think there's
any such thing.
To some degree,
yes, especially when
the passing is in
the proper order.
But I think there's
some things that
do seem to me irreconcilable.
And that is, for example,
the loss of a child
is always just very--
it's a very wrenching kind
of experience.
>>LISA: Unexplainable.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
And yet, you know, I got
to go on and say here
that the people who come to
me for counseling about grief
are people who are
having trouble.
So I couldn't necessarily say
from that that everybody fits
in that category, but
at least the people
I deal with, grief
is always-- you
never quite get over something.
I lost my first child
in June of 1970.
He was 36 hours old.
And in that era, people
didn't talk about such things.
A kind of wall of
silence came down.
And it's only
retrospectively that I
can see it never
really quite gets over.
No it doesn't.
>>LISA: It doesn't.
And after all of your
interviews and helping people
through the
experiences with death,
have you been through that
yourself with the psychomanteum
and the experiences
with the mirror?
Have you done all that yourself?
>>MOODY: I did.
I did.
And I tried to see my
cookie-baking grandma,
as I call her.
And--
>>LISA: Ever your child?
>>MOODY: --with whom I
had a wonderful-- no, I
haven't with my child,
which shows, I think,
maybe how tender this is.
But no, I haven't
tried with my child.
>>LISA: I asked you that
just because it really-- I
love how you answered
that question,
as a psychiatrist
and as a human.
It is one of the most
challenging things
to overcome that yet you
really don't ever overcome.
People have been
trying to figure it out
for thousands and
thousands of years.
>>MOODY: The way
I look at it is--
grief is-- if you think
of yourself as this,
like all your
consciousness is in here,
then when you have a
loss of that nature
then it fills up your
whole self with this grief.
And I can tell you here
in the 21st century
that I could go right back to--
If you ask me what
that grief is like,
I would say that it's the same,
but that now the difference
is this is me.
Grief, paradoxically
by working with it,
you can expand yourself
so that it occupies maybe
a lesser percentage of your
whole total conscious being.
But the grief in
itself, in my opinion,
just pretty much is the same.
>>LISA: Well, yet you've
created a life pursuit
of helping people get
through it by creating
this entire experience, which
we're going to take a look at,
the psychomanteum
and what that looks
like in a clip in just a minute.
But your whole mission,
purpose, passion
is to enable people
to connect with what
the afterlife could possibly be.
And does this indeed
ease people who
have lost loved ones,
in your experience?
>>MOODY: No question about it.
>>LISA: It does.
>>MOODY: I think it's
been demonstrated
in numerous studies
actually, as I understand,
that just reading about
near-death experiences
or hearing someone
talk about them
brings comfort to
people who are grieving.
Now, I have heard of
studies of that nature,
but I'm saying that from
my own personal experience
because I just hear from
people all the time,
from the very beginning I began
to lecture on this in 1969
and 1970, that I
heard people say
that just hearing
about these experiences
gives them some sort of comfort
in dealing with their losses.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
When we come back, we're
going to take a look
at what these experiences are
where Dr. Moody takes people
into the chamber and the mirror.
It's called the
psychomanteum experience.
And we'll take a look at
that when we come back.
This is Lisa Garr.
We'll be right back.
Welcome back.
My guest is Dr. Raymond
Moody, and we're
talking about, God, so many
great things-- life after life.
What we were talking about
before the break were
these controlled experiences,
these controlled circumstances,
that you take people through
called a psychomanteum.
What does that word mean?
>>MOODY: Well, it
basically means
a place where you go to
converse with the deceased.
>>LISA: Of course it does.
This isn't normal breakfast
table conversation.
So a place that you go to
converse with the deceased.
And you created this
out of a need for people
to heal from grief, yes?
>>MOODY: Oh, Lisa, that is
a wonderful thing to say.
That makes me seem
like a nice guy,
but I'll just be
completely honest.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MOODY: The reason I
was interested in this
initially was that
this was really
a very important
institution in the creation
of the entire Western
way of thinking.
And see, I was a
professor of logic.
I love logic.
And wild as it may seem--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>MOODY: I'm not going to
talk about this in detail,
but the Western logic came
from these Oracles of the Dead.
It's a long story, but
that's how it got started.
>>LISA: An interesting
one, though.
Give me the two minute on that.
>>MOODY: Well, basically
the philosopher Parmenides,
who was the person who--
>>MOODY: I remember studying
this in your course.
>>MOODY: In 500 BC,
Parmenides, who's
regarded as the father
of deductive logic, first
was able to articulate
the notion of truth.
That is, that some things
are the case independently
of what anybody thinks about it.
And that was too abstract
an idea for people
in a preliterate culture
to grasp for reasons
I won't go into.
But they were trying
to solve the problem,
and it was Parmenides
who did it.
And Parmenides in his
day job, as it were,
was a worker at one of
these Oracles of the Dead.
And he would get
in a cave, and he
was known as an
iatromantis-- or prophet
doctor is more or
less the translation.
But he would go through--
he would lie in the cave,
presumably lie
stock still, and he
would have these visionary
voyages into the other world.
And on one of his
trips over there,
he met this goddess who divulged
the first written-out logical
deduction in the form of a song.
And this was-- in
effect, you could
say histories of Western
thought make a dividing line
at Parmenides, because
things after Parmenides-- it
was a totally different world
after he discovered this.
And he, from his
point of view anyway,
brought this
information that was
the foundation of Western
logic back from the other side.
And that's how I got
interested in it.
And then when I
started doing it,
I realized that the people
that I was taking through it
were-- felt like they had
benefited in their grief
or moved on in their grief,
and it helped them and so on.
So that was a great-- that
was a great side effect.
>>LISA: So you got into it
from a place of curiosity
about logic, and then you wound
up effectively helping people.
>>MOODY: Yeah, and
then I realized-- well,
I really didn't
anticipate it, but I
saw that people who
went through this
actually did gain
relief from their grief.
>>LISA: We have a
clip of this, so I
want people to have the
experience of taking
a look at what
we're talking about.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>The success of the
modern psychomanteum,
both at his own
facility and elsewhere,
has led Raymond Moody to
direct his lifelong research
into the nature of death
yet one step further.
>>MOODY: It's well
known that people
on their deathbeds, dying people
who do go on to die, very often
just prior to their death will
say something like, oh, why,
there's mother, or there's
grandpa, or whatever.
In other words, it seems
that at the moment of death
they see apparitions of
departed relatives and friends
who seem to be there,
as it were, to meet them
or to help them through
this transition.
From time to time, physicians,
nurses, other people
at the bedside of
dying patients will
say that they have an
experience in which they
seem to see the person leave
the body at the moment of death.
Also, I've talk with a number
of physicians and nurses
and also friends of
people who have died,
relatives of people
who've died, who tell me
that they have undergone
what I can only
call empathetic
near-death experiences.
These are experiences in which,
for instance, the physician
who's resuscitating someone
who's very close to them
will say that, as this
person dies and begins
to slip into this experience
of seeing the tunnel
and going out of
the body and so on,
that the physician himself
or herself will begin
to experience
this, will actually
enter into the near-death
experience of the dying person.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Do you feel
that those people that
had the experiences,
the shared death
experiences, that they
have to-- that they're
related to that
person in some way,
that they're within
their realm of relations?
Do you know what I mean by that?
>>MOODY: Oh, well,
actually, Lisa, no.
It's very interesting,
because I hear the same thing
from doctors who were just
called in to see a patient.
They didn't know who it was, and
they were on call or whatever.
And they had to
resuscitate a stranger,
and maybe the
person died during.
But they say that they see this
light leave the body and so on.
So apparently, in
the general case,
yes, usually it's the
people at the bedside
or loved ones and
friends and so on,
but I've had plenty of cases,
too, of physicians who just
called in to see a
perfect stranger who
was in the process of
dying and saw this light
or saw the person leave
their bodies and so on.
>>LISA: This just
begs the question,
and you're the perfect
person to ask about this.
I need to ask you about
parallel universes,
and multidimensional realities,
and different dimensions.
This really begs the question
of, do those dimensions exist?
Do you have any evidence of
those dimensions existing
in your experience?
>>MOODY: Quite a number,
in absolute terms
but not in percentage terms,
of the people with a near-death
experience-- a small
percentage of them,
and variably these
are people who
had extremely lengthy
cardiac arrests that
went far beyond that-- we all
hear the five-minute rule,
that beyond five minutes
you can't resuscitate
because the brain is damaged.
And as a rule of
thumb, that's terrific,
but in many cases also there's
just-- it doesn't work out.
And we have cases
of people who had
extremely lengthy
cardiac arrests and yet
who've recovered and were fine.
>>LISA: And they say
that's less than 1%,
but I've spoken to several.
>>MOODY: And so these people
with the extremely lengthy
cardiac arrests will
say, yes, that they
see that there are different
levels or dimensions.
And I've heard people
say, for example,
that they see into one
dimension that is entirely,
in effect, an institution of
higher learning, that people
are there pursuing
knowledge and truth.
And that other people--
these people say also
they see another dimension of
reality, which is described,
or people try to
put it into words
by saying, cities of light.
>>LISA: It's always
about the light.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
And they say that's it's
like a civilization,
but it's not constructed
of matter but of light.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
So as we speak right
here, right now,
there very well could be
parallel or multiple dimensions
happening at this very
time, non locally.
>>MOODY: Well, you know, that's
what even physicists tell us.
Not all physicists,
but some physicists
are into this kind of view
that all of the possibilities
are realized.
Yeah.
>>LISA: Thank
you for--
>>MOODY: On one interpretation
of quantum mechanics,
for example, all of the
choices, all of the bifurcation
or dividing points,
that there's some sense
in which all the different
possibilities are realized.
>>LISA: Well, from
your perspective,
where you bring people
into the psychomanteum
in this controlled circumstance
where they can actually
access the apparitions
of other people,
or if you speak
to people who have
had these multiple-dimensional
near-death experiences--
I myself have been through that.
So I just had to
ask the question.
So I want to get back into
the near-death experience
and where people
go to the light.
We hear-- You've spoken so much
about this, about the light,
and over and over you
hear people speaking
about this idea of
going to the light.
And we have a clip
of this, so I want
to show people what this
is and a little bit more
about what that experience is.
Multiple people talking about.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>This is the most
wonderful part of it.
This is a warm, loving light.
It's the most
masculine, but it also
has overtones of mother
love, sisterly love.
This just pulsates around.
He has totally accepted
me and forgiven me
for everything I've ever
done, but can I forgive myself
for some of these selfish
things I have done?
>>And there was this
unconditional love
like most parents have
for their children,
that no matter how
bad I might have been
or-- that I was totally
loved and totally understood,
and-- just wonderful love.
>>And sitting there,
wondering what
to do next, when suddenly that
room became flooded with light.
And then three things happened
simultaneously just like that.
Something deep inside of
the spiritual being sitting
on the side of the bed looking
at the corpse lying in the bed
was told to stand up, you're in
the presence of the son of God.
Out of that light stepped the
most amazing being I have ever
been in the presence of, the
most powerfully built male
I have ever seen.
And now, once being in the
presence of the being who
knows everything about you, to
know that he totally accepts
you and totally
loves you, I never
wanted to leave this being
again under any circumstance.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: You said
that he was really
one of the most impactful
people in your life.
>>MOODY: Oh yeah, George Ritchie
was the finest human being
I ever knew in my
life, no question.
>>LISA: He seems like he
was an amazing person.
>>MOODY: Oh, he was.
He was just incredible.
>>LISA: Why did he
impact you so much?
>>MOODY: Well-- Well,
you know, George-- I
lived in the same community
George Ritchie did
for some time, and
you get to know people
like that because of
the things that you
hear about other people
telling you about.
And he was just so completely
kind and loving and yet
just totally human, too.
And when I heard his
experience in 1965,
I was an undergraduate
at UVA, and I
knew that something
had happened to me when
I heard that experience,
which has played out
in the rest of my life.
And it turns out,
actually-- this
isn't-- my-- George's experience
took place at Camp Barkeley,
Texas in December 1943 when he
was a recruit into the Army.
And hearing the story in 1965
so profoundly influenced me.
Then I went on this
quest of interviewing
all these other people.
And the book was published
in November of '75.
And just before I published
it, I called Dr. Ritchie
and asked if I could
dedicate the book to him.
So that was the only contact
in those intervening 10 years.
Now, flash forward
to March of '76.
I was talking about this with
my father, who by then had heard
a tape of Dr.
Ritchie's experience.
And I can tell you exactly
what Dr.-- my father said.
He said, huh, that's
really interesting.
George Ritchie, Camp Barkeley,
Texas, December 1943.
He said, you know, I was
there and so were you.
My mom and dad are from
Porterdale, Georgia.
George is from
Richmond, Virginia.
But my dad went
to Camp Barkeley,
Texas in early
September 1943 so he
could go to officers
candidate school.
I was conceived in
late September 1943.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness, wow.
>>MOODY: George's experience
was December 24, 1943.
And Mom and Dad moved away from
Camp Barkeley in December 29,
1943.
So I was there in utero--
>>LISA: In spirit.
>>MOODY: --when
this experience took
place that changed my life.
And I didn't know about
it until "Life After Life"
had already been published.
>>LISA: How many times
do you see people
in groups communicating with
each other in the afterlife?
>>MOODY: Now, that's
interesting, Lisa.
Nothing really comes to mind,
except occasionally I've
had cases of
near-death experiences
where two people
at once came close
to death in the course
of an accident and so on.
And then, subsequently, even
when they were still separated,
talked about, yeah, I saw--
and they had this communication
even when they were
out of their bodies.
>>LISA: Interesting.
What's the difference
between life
after life and reincarnation?
>>MOODY: Well, you know, out
of the thousands of people
that I've talked with who
had near-death experiences,
there were only
three of them that
had some experience within
the near-death experience that
led them to think that
there's a reincarnation.
But the great majority of the
others who didn't see anything
related to reincarnation,
nonetheless
it seems to wake them up at
least to the possibility.
People will say things like,
I didn't really say anything
over there than indicated to
me that there's reincarnation,
because I only went to a
certain point and came back,
but they seem to
be emotionally more
accepting of that possibility
after a near-death experience.
>>LISA: Is there a
theme in the people
that you've interviewed
as to why they come back?
Do they come back to a-- because
of a calling of a loved one
that's calling them
back or a mission?
Or have you noticed a through
line with these people?
>>MOODY: Sometimes people, when
they're over there, are told,
you've got to go back,
you've got things left to do.
But they're not told what that
is that they're supposed to do,
which can be very
frustrating for them.
And yet, having known some
of these people for decades,
I see that in the passage of
time, they sort of wake up
and they say, oh, that's
why I had to come back.
Then other people just don't
know why they were sent back.
And some people
are given a choice.
They're told that
they can either
go on with the experience
they're having or go back
to the life they were leading.
And not too surprisingly,
all of those
that were given that
choice that I interviewed
chose to come back.
But what's interesting in
this, they almost always
give the same reason.
And that is that, for
themselves, they would rather
have stayed in that
light, but they
chose to come back
because they had
young children left to raise.
That's the most common
thing people say.
Or they say that, I spent my
life preparing for a helping
profession and I chose to
come back to complete that.
>>LISA: I imagine
that this could
be very healing for
children who are now
adults who have lost
parents when they
were young, or at
any age really,
to be able to know that
that parent went to a place,
that the transition
was a good place.
At least this could be--
>>MOODY: Yes.
And then we always got
to think that-- even
people with near-death
experiences tell me that when--
after they come back from
this and they lose a loved
one, that they still grieve.
>>LISA: Oh, of course.
>>MOODY: Because-- and what
it really does, I think,
is to put the locus
of the grieving more--
it makes it more obvious.
Because people with
near-death experiences
say that when they lose a
loved one that they realize,
of course, my loved one
is OK, but I miss them,
is the thing that they get.
Losing a parent is a very
difficult thing for a child.
And recent studies
indicate that 20
seems to be the line
there that, if you lose
a parent before you're
age 20, that it's
very difficult for
people to reconcile.
So I'm trying to stay around
for another nine years.
>>LISA: Why nine years?
>>MOODY: Well, because I've
got an 11-year-old daughter,
and she's my youngest.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>MOODY: So I figure that gives
good reason to try to stay.
>>LISA: Would you stick around
a little longer for us, please?
>>MOODY: Insofar
as it's possible.
>>LISA: You told me a story
about someone who you knew who
was adopted and went
back to discover--
>>MOODY: Oh, yes.
In recent months, I've come
across the most amazing
near-death experience
I've ever heard.
And this is by an
absolutely wonderful man
named Eben Alexander III.
E-B-E-N Alexander III.
And Eben, to sketch out
his qualifications for you,
Eben was professor
of neurosurgery
at Harvard for 15 years.
And his list of
scientific publications
is like this, including
some amazing discoveries
in neurosciences and so on.
Well, Eben, like many other
people in his profession,
had been sort of taken
up in this doctrine
that consciousness is a
secondary byproduct of brain
process and has no
independent reality.
That's just what he had always
assumed from his profession.
And in November of 2008, Eben
developed a horrific condition
called E. coli meningitis, which
is unheard of among adults.
It's occasionally with
infants, but almost
unheard of of adults.
And in those few cases where
it happens with adults,
it's virtually unsurvivable,
and those who do survive
are impaired.
So that was the situation.
So in November of 2008,
he developed this illness.
His colleagues, no doubt
concerned about him.
He was carefully monitored
throughout this illness.
He went into a week-long coma.
And the distribution
of the lesions
absolutely preclude that he
could have been conscious
by the standard
neurophysiological theories
of consciousness.
But when he woke up,
he talked about going
into this other world, and
just an incredible story
of a journey into another world.
And throughout this, he
kept seeing this young woman
that he didn't know who she
was, but she was at a distance
and not making direct contact.
But he kept seeing
this young woman.
Now, after he recovered from
this illness with no seqhela,
he's just vibrant.
And so he started being
curious about his--
he had known that he was
adopted at age four months,
and adopted by a neurosurgeon in
Winston-Salem, North Carolina,
where Eben grew up.
And so he knew that he had
been adopted at four months,
and what he had been
told or understood
about his birth parents was
that they were high school
sweethearts and that
after he was born
they went their separate ways.
So then he got curious when he
came back from his experience
as to what-- you know, about
his biological birth situation.
So he did some inquiring,
and he found out
that this woman who
worked at the institution
where he was born was willing
to give him some information.
And he found out that his birth
parents had subsequently gotten
married and had
several children.
So he went and made
the reunion with them,
and when he did--
he found them--
they were in mourning because
of the loss of their daughter.
And so when Eben saw the
photograph of this daughter,
it was the young girl he
had seen in this vision.
>>LISA: Wow, that's
a chilling story.
>>MOODY: This is coming out
soon, I think, in a book.
And this, I think,
is very difficult
to explain in prosaic terms.
I think we're getting closer and
closer to the situation where
we're just going to have
to breathe a deep sigh
and say, my god, there
is life after death.
>>LISA: That's what
you're here for.
Tell me a little bit about
your new book, "Paranormal."
>>MOODY: Well, "The
Paranormal" is my memoirs.
And this sort of suggestion came
from my co-writer Paul Perry.
And I never thought
my life would
be particularly interesting.
>>LISA: It is.
That's why you're here.
>>MOODY: But my wonderful
friend, Paul Perry,
who's just a superb journalist
plus a really nice guy--
and he-- I've known
Paul since 1988.
And so he-- I sort of
told my life story to him,
and then he's put it
together in this book.
And it's about the quest
I've made in my life
to try to understand
this mystery of what
happens to us when we die.
>>LISA: Well, there
was also a movie that
was made about this experience
of the near-death experience
and so forth.
We have a clip of
the movie coming up
that kind of encapsulates what
people experience when they
go through a
near-death experience.
Let's look at that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>The lightning came down the
phone line, entered my neck.
It went through my spine,
threw me up in the air.
>>And I felt myself
pop out of the body.
Then I felt myself
float up to the ceiling.
And the doctor and the
nurse were in there,
and he was looking at me.
He said, she's gone.
She's dead.
>>And I was taken to hospital.
Doctors did anything
they could to help me,
but I was declared dead.
>>I realized I
was out of my body
when I was suddenly
looking at this light.
>>Out of that light stepped
the most amazing being
I have ever been
in the presence of.
>>It was just all-consuming
love, wonderful love.
>>Death is nothing more
or less than a doorway,
something you walk through.
>>Death does not exist.
Don't be afraid.
>>This was holographical view
of being inside of your life
and then being as a
viewer, participating
the play of theater.
>>He was asking
me, had I learned
to love my fellow human
beings the way that he totally
accepted and loved me?
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: It really, really
does answer so many-- well,
it poses so many questions.
>>MOODY: There you go.
That's right.
>>LISA: You come up
with your own answers.
What do you think is the overall
thing that people take away
from an experience
like nearly dying?
>>MOODY: That the
most important thing
we can do while we're here
is to learn how to love,
and that that's a difficult
thing even after you've
had this vision, but
that it's worth pursuing.
And that's what I hear from
people all over the world,
that what this is all
about is learning to love.
>>LISA: Now, this
particular time, though,
in history that
we're in right now,
why do you think that is
so apparent right now?
>>MOODY: Well, it's interesting.
There have always been
these experiences,
and they were discussed
about in antiquity,
but the reason why we're
hearing so many these days,
I conjecture, is
that the techniques
of cardiopulmonary resuscitation
are refined to such an extent
that we can bring a
lot more people back.
And I think that-- I don't
want to draw a connection here,
but, I mean, to me it's a
rather remarkable coincidence
that just at the time
where this is surfacing
as an undeniable thing-- we're
really into a situation now
where we can't turn away
from these experiences.
This is a reality.
And at that same time,
it looks like we're
in a race with
ourselves to see who
can destroy the planet first.
>>LISA: So there's
a paradox here.
>>MOODY: I do.
I do.
And I think that people
have always said, oh, times
are bad and so on, but we have a
different kind of evidence now.
All the many things
that are going
on-- the trouble with the
atmosphere, the climate
change, the proliferation
of nuclear weapons,
the real chance that terrorists
will get a nuclear bomb
and strike at a city-- all of
these things are pretty grim.
Plus, I think personally-- and
this is like being on a soapbox
to some degree,
but we've developed
a society here in America of
the immediate-gratification
mentality, that
people want it now.
They want it without effort.
They want it without
going through a process.
So it looks to me that
all of these things
are coming together
in a way that people
are kind of desperate.
They're wandering
around without a center.
And they're wondering,
what's this all about?
And there's very scary
things going on in the world
right now.
So I think this
information can be
very comforting in that context.
The way I've come
to think of it,
Lisa, is-- and I'm speaking
kind of metaphorically here
admittedly-- but I think
this thing we're in
is God's educate and
entertainment medium.
>>LISA: Well, what do you mean?
>>MOODY: Well, I mean I think
God is totally in charge here.
>>LISA: Coming from a
non-religious person.
>>MOODY: Yeah, well,
I'm still not religious.
I talk to God all the
time, and he's never
said to me about going to
church or anything like that.
>>LISA: But what do you
mean, specifically what
you were talking about?
>>MOODY: Well, I do think
that this life we're
in, that the explanation
of it lies outside of it.
And the way that I
sort of put it together
is that we're here in this
dimension and this kind
of physical framework
as participants
analogously to people
in a play or a drama.
I think one of the people
in that documentary
mentioned that.
And that's, incidentally,
a point of view
that's in Hinduism, that
this is a large play.
Shakespeare, I think,
said something similar,
like that all life is a stage.
And what I think we're here
for is to learn and also
to become more
loving, to develop--
learn how to love and to
develop loving relationships
with others.
And I think, to sort
of transcend ego.
Ego equals pain, as
far as I can tell.
That's one of the
few things that I've
learned as a person
who's studied
the mind is, that much
I'm sure of, ego is pain.
>>LISA: To one person
or the other, yes.
>>MOODY: It's always pain.
>>LISA: You mentioned
to me earlier
that you live an ego-less life.
>>MOODY: Well, and
that itself sounds
like an egotistical statement.
Which it would be if I said,
well, the way I've gotten
finished with the ego is that
I went up on the mountain
and I did the chants, but
that's not how I did it.
The reason I'm
finished with the ego
is that I pretty near
killed myself with it.
And my particular ego
trip was jealousy.
But once you go
through an ego trip,
you kind of realize that
all ego trips are the same.
>>LISA: Jealousy, control--
all of it's the same thing.
>>MOODY: Exactly.
And that, I'm sick
of myself in a way.
I'm through with Raymond Moody.
And part of this is just being
67 years old, because as people
grow older we kind of
surrender these things.
And I think, like many
people in my age range,
I don't think about
myself anymore.
I think about--
what I want to do
is try to help the
generations that are coming,
especially my kids.
And of course, my kids
will be in a world
where there are other
people their age.
So I really do.
I'm in this situation where,
like many other people
in my age, I'm just-- I want to
try to help smooth things over
for the people who are coming.
I still enjoy myself, too.
Don't get me wrong.
>>LISA: What type
of message would you
give the youth of today?
>>MOODY: Well, one thing I would
say very severely, I mean now,
youth, the way it's
set up, they don't
suppose to listen to
their elders, right,
and they got to learn
it for themselves.
But time's kind of running
out in a way for this society.
What I think more than anything
else we need to do is to,
number one, get over this
instant gratification
mentality.
Immediate gratification is
no gratification at all.
>>LISA: Well, with
the age of technology,
it does-- it really puts
people into that space.
>>MOODY: Yes, and
there is a great value
in working through a process.
Then the second
thing I would say
is that we've really got
to wake up to the fact
that this information
about near-death
experiences as getting
harder, and harder, and harder
to dismiss or to say that,
well, this is the brain damage
or whatever, because it's not.
If the bystanders have the same
experience as the people who
are-- who almost die
and return, then it's
not the oxygen
deprivation to the brain.
Something else is going on.
>>LISA: The shared
death experience
really shows that, yes.
>>MOODY: That's right.
And then the third
thing, which comes
from the near-death experience
and so on and these shared
death experiences, is that
what this is all about
is learning how to love.
And to get engrossed in the
ideology of your religion
or whatever is
counterproductive to this.
>>LISA: But what if your
religion's ideology is to love?
>>MOODY: Oh, yeah.
Well, that's what I mean
is-- but let's face it.
On TV, we see a lot of
people who aren't so loving.
I saw Franklin
Graham on CNN today,
and I thought that was a
very mean-spirited person,
to tell you the truth.
Like he's got the insight
into Jesus, and the rest of us
are scum.
Well, no.
No.
It doesn't have anything to do
with what religious ideology
you subscribe to.
It has to do with the
kind of life you lead
and having to-- to try to
be loving to other people.
>>LISA: Well, there is one
last clip that we have here,
and it kind of sums up Raymond
Moody's experience here
of what he wants to
impart upon people
about the near-death experience.
Let's take a look at that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>MOODY: My hope for it
is that it will turn out
to be something
very therapeutic,
and that it will help
people who are undergoing
prolonged grief, who just can't
let go of a loved one lost
to death and for that reason
are miserable themselves.
And one of the
most common things
that you hear people
say at that time
is, if I only had
five more minutes.
What we can do now,
without a doubt,
is that we can give people
that five more minutes.
If we can help people like
this turn themselves around
and open up to hope and to a new
life, then I think all of this
would be justified.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: There's so much
more that you have to say.
We were just talking about--
about what you could--
What do you want to just
conclude with and tell us?
What's next for you?
I have so much-- You
have so much more to say.
Yes.
>>MOODY: Well, first of all,
what I'd like to say to people
is, when you hear
these people on TV
who are very nice
and well meaning,
who have a Ph.D. or an
M.D. behind their names,
and they're saying things
like, oh, we can scientifically
prove that there's life
after death, watch out.
I know some of these people.
They're very sweet.
They're well meaning, but
they have practically zero
critical thinking skills.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MOODY: The question of
life after death is not yet
a scientific question.
That's the fact.
Because what we've
done in the West
is that we've made a kind
of God out of science.
And the fact is
that science is not
going to solve all our problems.
So TO-- at this point
in the 21st century,
to try to imply to
people that this
can be a scientific
question is not valid.
And that mistake sort of
casts dispersions there
on all of us who investigate
near-death experiences.
What I want to say
is that we are now
very close to having
entirely new rational means
of investigating this
question that are going to be,
when this comes out, astounding.
>>LISA: Well, what do you mean?
>>MOODY: Well, what I mean is
that the real question when
we-- and there's
a big difference
between rational and scientific.
Rational is a larger
category than scientific.
One category of reason
is scientific inquiry,
but scientific inquiry is
only about 400 years old.
We've had reason for a
much longer period of time.
And the real
difficulty in thinking
about the possibility of a
rational proof of an afterlife
was best stated by a wonderful
thinker named David Hume.
And to date him for you, he
was a friend of Ben Franklin's.
Hume lived from 1711 to 1776.
He's well known as one of the
people who was kind of got
scientific thinking on its feet.
And he made some
brilliant insights
into inductive logic,
which scientists use,
and also into the
notion of causality
that we have in science.
And Hume said more succinctly
than anybody else ever said,
he pointed out the
real difficulty
in investigating this question
of life after death rationally.
And what Hume said was, "by
the mere light of reason,
it seems difficult to prove
the immortality of the soul."
Then he went on to say,
"some new species of logic
is requisite for that purpose,
and some new faculties
of the mind that they may enable
us to comprehend that logic."
Now, for a long time,
that has been regarded
as a sort of ironical
statement and that
really what he was getting
at is that it's impossible.
Because the logic that we've
inherited from Aristotle
has served us well
for 2,300 years.
Maybe it doesn't
seem very likely
that we could come up with
a new system of logic.
And also we think we know
our minds pretty well,
so the idea that there could
be these hidden faculties
of the mind seems implausible.
Well, what I am just perfectly
confident in sitting here
and saying to you is that
problem has now been solved.
We do have a new
system of logic,
not to replace
Aristotle's logic,
but to supplement it in
these areas which heretofore
have fallen outside of
the process of logic.
And through this, we
find that we can actually
open up these hidden
faculties of the mind
that we didn't know we had.
And what this-- the
implication of this is
is that this results in entirely
new ways of genuinely rational
investigation of this
question of life after death.
And what we are
doing now, we are
people who are learning
this new logic.
When, just by chance
in the future,
they happen to have a
near-death experience,
will be able to come back
and talk about it to us
in an entirely new way.
>>LISA: What is this new
logic you're talking about?
>>MOODY: Well,
basically the difficulty
with the notion of life after
death from the point of view
of regular logic is that
it's a self-contradiction.
When you say, there
is life after death,
if you look up the meanings
of those words, that's
an outright
self-contradiction, and it
doesn't fit into
Aristotelian logic.
What we now have is
a new kind of logic
that helps us
comprehend things that
are unintelligible from the
point of view of regular logic.
And what I'm completely
confident in sitting here
and saying to you is that now
we have, in effect, a logic
of the unintelligible.
And when people know this
logic of the unintelligible
and then subsequently they
have a near-death experience,
they're going to
come back and they
won't have the same
difficulty that people
have had of putting it
into words because they
have a new logical framework.
>>LISA: I see.
OK.
>>MOODY: And this is
already bearing some fruit.
So stay tuned, because in
the not-too-distant future,
we are going to have--
well, I'll put it this way.
There has now been a solid
step of genuine progress
toward the rational
comprehension of the biggest
mystery of human existence.
That is, the question
of life after death.
So we are now into
an era where we're
going to have new means of
investigating this and entirely
unique methods that have never
been done before where we will
actually be able to track people
right as they cross over--
>>LISA: You have to tell me what
some of those new means are.
I'm sure you're at
the forefront of this.
>>MOODY: Well, one
is that we have
a way now where-- have you-- one
thing that may sound startling
but that many of our viewers
will be able to relate to is
that its a very common
phenomenon that,
as people are in their
final stage of dying,
like the last days or hours of
life, that they talk nonsense,
that they're talking but you
can't make any sense of it.
Now we have a logic that's
going to be able to understand
those enigmatic
conversations of the dying
so that we can actually sort of
follow people as they go across
into this other
state of existence.
>>LISA: I have heard that
from various hospice workers.
That I had the experience
of watching my husband's
great grandmother pass, and--
peacefully in the house.
And we, through the days
leading up to her final passing,
was communicating with
different people beyond.
And the hospice worker said
this is very, very common,
which we heard in
one of the clips.
>>MOODY: Oh, yes, absolutely.
>>LISA: So this is what you
hear, and you're tracking this.
>>MOODY: Yes, we'll actually
be able now to track this.
And it's ha-- I wasn't
really anticipating this.
I am a logician, and
I developed my system
of logic quite outside of the
question of life after death,
but it happens to be
very apropos and germane.
So it gives us an
entirely new means
of investigating
the question of life
after death and many
other questions that
have thus far eluded
rational comprehension.
>>LISA: So it's not scientific.
It's more
philosophical, however,
circles back to new realms
of scientific thinking.
>>MOODY: If you look
at it in the past,
always when a new question
comes into rational domain,
it's a conceptual advance first,
and then it becomes scientific.
>>LISA: I'm noticing that
in very different circles,
as well, about the new emergent
human and the new humanity.
And this is what was on the
forefront of all science
and humanity sciences,
which is great.
>>MOODY: And because of these
conceptual advances that
have been made, it could be
that in the future, then,
this will become a properly
scientific question.
But it's got to go first
through the conceptual side
before it can be scientific.
>>LISA: Into the new
science, we will say.
Oh, well.
Thank you so much.
>>MOODY: Thank you, Lisa.
This has been delightful.
>>LISA: Oh, and keeping me on
the edge of my seat, as well.
I love your stories,
and I love your vision.